Example tutorials (#520)
nf-core/eager: docs/tutorial_human_popgen.md

> # Tutorial on how to set up nf-core/eager for metagenomic screening

Author: @TCLamnidis check title. I know you are jelly that I work on the cool stuff, but I think it might confuse other poor poop-genners ;).

## Introduction

This tutorial will give a basic example on how to set up
nf-core/eager to perform initial screening of samples in the context of ancient
human population genetics research.

> :warning: this tutorial does not describe how to install and setup
> nf-core/eager For this please see other documentation on the
> [nf-co.re](https://nf-co.re/usage/installation) website.

We will describe how to set up mapping of ancient sequences against
the human reference genome to allow sequencing and library quality-control,
estimation of nuclear contamination, genetic sex determination, and
production of random draw genotypes in eigenstrat format for a specific set of

> sites, to be used in further analysis. For this example, I will be using the 1240k

Reviewer: Added a bit more

--fasta_index '../Reference/genome/hs37d5.fa.fai' \
--seq_dict '../Reference/genome/hs37d5.dict' \
--outdir './results/' \
- w './work/' \
--complexity_filter_poly_g \
--preserve5p \
--bwaalnn 0.01 \
<...>
```

Next, we will set up trimming of the mapped reads to allevite the effects of DNA damage. To do this we will activate trimming with `--run_trim_bam`. The libraries in this underwent 'half' UDG treatment. This will generally restrict all remaining DNA damage to the first 2 base pairs of a fragment. We will therefore use `--bamutils_clip_half_udg_left` and `--bamutils_clip_half_udg_right` to trim 2bp on either side of each fragment.

```bash
nextflow run nf-core/eager \
-r 2.2.0 \
-profile sdag,shh,singularity \
-name 'projectX_screening20200727' \
--input 'screening20200727.tsv' \
--fasta '../Reference/genome/hs37d5.fa' \
--bwa_index '../Reference/genome/hs37d5/' \
--fasta_index '../Reference/genome/hs37d5.fa.fai' \
--seq_dict '../Reference/genome/hs37d5.dict' \
--outdir './results/' \
- w './work/' \
--complexity_filter_poly_g \
--preserve5p \
--bwaalnn 0.01 \
--run_trim_bam \
--bamutils_clip_half_udg_left 2 \
--bamutils_clip_half_udg_right 2 \
<...>
```

> To activate sex determination (using Sex.DetERRmine.py) we will provide the

Author: Add link to SexDet repo

```bash
nextflow run nf-core/eager \
-r 2.2.0 \
-profile sdag,shh,singularity \
-name 'projectX_screening20200727' \
--input 'screening20200727.tsv' \
--fasta '../Reference/genome/hs37d5.fa' \
--bwa_index '../Reference/genome/hs37d5/' \
--fasta_index '../Reference/genome/hs37d5.fa.fai' \
--seq_dict '../Reference/genome/hs37d5.dict' \
--outdir './results/' \
- w './work/' \
--complexity_filter_poly_g \
--preserve5p \
--bwaalnn 0.01 \
--run_trim_bam \
--bamutils_clip_half_udg_left 2 \
--bamutils_clip_half_udg_right 2 \
--run_sexdeterrmine \
--sexdeterrmine_bedfile '../Reference/genome/1240k.sites.bed' \
--run_nuclear_contamination \
--contamination_chrom_name 'X' \
<...>
```

Because nuclear contamination estimates can only be provided for males, it is
possible that we will need to get mitchondrial DNA contamination estimates for
any females in our dataset. This cannot be done within eager (v2.2.0) and we
will need to do this manually at a later time. However, mtDNA contamination

> estimates have been shown to only be reliable for nuclear contamination when

Author: Citation with DOI link

Reviewer: for eager? We don't provide one in Introduction or Preparation. Why suddenly have one here?

> the ratio of mitochondrial to nuclear reads is low. We can have eager calculate

Author: ```suggestion
the ratio of mitochondrial to nuclear reads is low. We can have nf-core/eager calculate
```

[FAQ](../faq.md)), we can now check our results in `results/`.

### MultiQC Report

In here there are many different directories containing different output files.
The first directory to check is the `MultiQC/` directory. In here you should
find a `multiqc_report.html` file. You will need to view this in a web browser,
so I recommend either mounting your server to your file browser, or downloading
it to your own local machine (PC/Laptop etc.).

Once you've opened this you can go through each section and evaluate all the
results. You will likely want to check these for artefacts (e.g. weird damage
patterns on the human DNA, or weirdly skewed coverage distributions).

For example, I normally look for things like:

General Stats Table:

- Do I see the expected number of raw sequencing reads (summed across each set
  of FASTQ files per library) that was requested for sequencing?
- Does the percentage of trimmed reads look normal for aDNA, and do lengths
  after trimming look short as expected of aDNA?
- Does ClusterFactor or 'Dups' look high (e.g. >2 or >10%
  respectively) suggesting over-amplified or
  badly preserved samples?

> - Does the human DNA show increased frequency of C>Ts on the 5' end of molecules

Author: ```suggestion
- Do the mapped reads show increased frequency of C>Ts on the 5' end of molecules
```

  (you may need to un-hide the 2nd base columns with 'configure columns'
  button)?
- Is the number of SNPs used for nuclear contamination really low for any
  individuals (e.g. < 100)? then the estimates might not be very accurate.

FastQC (pre-AdapterRemoval):

- Do I see any very early drop off of sequence quality scores suggesting
  problematic sequencing run?
- Do I see outlier GC content distributions?
- Do I see high sequence duplication levels?

AdapterRemoval:

- Do I see high numbers of singletons or discarded read pairs?

FastQC (post-AdapterRemoval):

- Do I see improved sequence quality scores along the length of reads?
- Do I see reduced adapter content levels?

Samtools Flagstat (pre/post Filter):

> - Do I see outliers, e.g. with unusually high levels of human DNA, (indicative

Author: Describe what would be an outlier in your case!

Reviewer: Done

  of contamination) that require downstream closer assessment?

DeDup/Picard MarkDuplicates):

- Do I see large numbers of duplicates being removed, possibly indicating
  over-amplified or badly preserved samples?

DamageProfiler:

- Do I see evidence of damage on human DNA? 

>   - If high numbers of human DNA reads but no damage may indicate significant

Author: ```suggestion
  - If high numbers of mapped reads but no damage may indicate significant
```

    modern contamination.
  - Was the read trimming I specified enough to overcome damage effects?

SexDetERRmine:

- Do the relative coverages on the X and Y chromosome fall within the expected areas of the plot?
- Do all individuals have enough data for accurate sex determination?
- Do the proportions of autosomal/X/Y reads make sense? If there is an
  overrepresentation of reads within one bin, is the data enriched for that
  bin? 

> Detailed documentation and descriptions for all MultiQC modules can be seen in
> the the 'Documentation' folder of the results directory or here in the [output
> documentation](output.md)

If you're happy everything looks good in terms of sequencing, we then look at
specific directories to find any files you might want to use for downstream
processing.

Note that when you get back to writing up your publication, all the versions of

> the tools can be found under the 'nf-core/eager Software Versions` section of

Author: ```suggestion
the tools can be found under the 'nf-core/eager Software Versions' section of
```

> the MultiQC report. Note that all tools in the container are listed, so you may

Author: ```suggestion
the MultiQC report. But be careful! All tools in the container are listed, so you may
```

have to remove some of them that you didn't actually use in the set up.

For example, in this example, we have used: Nextflow, nf-core/eager, FastQC,
AdapterRemoval, fastP, BWA, Samtools, endorS.py, DeDup, Qualimap, PreSeq,
DamageProfiler, bamUtil, sexdeterrmine, angsd, MTNucRatioCalculator,
sequenceTools, and MultiQC.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Citations to all used tools can be seen
[here](https://nf-co.re/eager#tool-references)

```

# Tutorial on how to set up nf-core/eager for human population genetics

## Introduction

This tutorial will give a basic example on how to set up
nf-core/eager to perform initial screening of samples in the context of ancient
human population genetics research.

> :warning: this tutorial does not describe how to install and setup
> nf-core/eager For this please see other documentation on the
> [nf-co.re](https://nf-co.re/usage/installation) website.

We will describe how to set up mapping of ancient sequences against
the human reference genome to allow sequencing and library quality-control,
estimation of nuclear contamination, genetic sex determination, and
production of random draw genotypes in eigenstrat format for a specific set of
sites, to be used in further analysis. For this example, I will be using the

> 1240k SNP set. This SNP set was first described in
> [Mathieson et al. 2015](https://www.nature.com/articles/nature16152) and probes
> targeting these SNPs can be used to enrich ancient DNA libraries for fragments
> of DNA overlapping these SNPs.

Author: ```suggestion
1240k SNP set. This SNP set was first described in
[Mathieson et al. 2015](https://www.nature.com/articles/nature16152) and contains positions shown to be highly useful for ancient population genetic analysis. Capture techniques are often used to enrich DNA libraries for fragments, that overlap these SNPs, as is being assumed has been performed in this example.
```
